The periodic table, also known as the periodic table of elements, arranges the chemical elements such as hydrogen, silicon, iron, and uranium according to their recurring properties. The number of each element corresponds to the number of protons in its nucleus (which is the same as the number of electrons orbiting that nucleus). The modern periodic table provides a useful framework for analyzing chemical reactions, and is widely used in chemistry, physics and other sciences.

The seven rows of the table, called periods, generally have metals on the left and nonmetals on the right. The columns, called groups, contain elements with similar chemical behaviours. Six groups have accepted names as well as assigned numbers: for example, group 17 elements are the halogens; and group 18 are the noble gases. Also displayed are four simple rectangular areas or blocks associated with the filling of different atomic orbitals. The organization of the periodic table can be used to derive relationships between the properties of the various elements, and to predict chemical properties and behaviours of undiscovered or newly synthesized elements.

Russian chemist Dmitri Mendeleev published a periodic table in 1869, which he developed mainly to illustrate recurring trends among the properties of the then-known elements. He was the first to predict some properties of unidentified elements that were expected to fill gaps within the table. Most of his forecasts proved to be correct, culminating with the discovery of gallium and germanium in 1875 and 1886 respectively, which corroborated his predictions.[1] Mendeleev's idea has been slowly expanded and refined with the discovery or synthesis of further new elements and the development of new theoretical models to explain chemical behaviour.

The table here shows a widely used layout. Other forms (discussed below) show different structures in detail. Some questions remain as to the placement and categorisation of specific elements, future extensions and limits of the table, and whether there is an optimal form of table.

According to their shared physical and chemical properties, the elements can be classified into the major categories of metals, metalloids and nonmetals. Metals are generally shiny, highly conducting solids that form alloys with one another and salt-like ionic compounds with nonmetals (other than noble gases). A majority of nonmetals are colored or colorless insulating gases; nonmetals that form compounds with other nonmetals feature covalent bonding. In between metals and nonmetals are metalloids, which have intermediate or mixed properties.[13]

A group or family is a vertical column in the periodic table. Groups usually have more significant periodic trends than periods and blocks, explained below. Modern quantum mechanical theories of atomic structure explain group trends by proposing that elements within the same group generally have the same electron configurations in their valence shell.[14] Consequently, elements in the same group tend to have a shared chemistry and exhibit a clear trend in properties with increasing atomic number.[15] In some parts of the periodic table, such as the d-block and the f-block, horizontal similarities can be as important as, or more pronounced than, vertical similarities.[16][17][18]

Under an international naming convention, the groups are numbered numerically from 1 to 18 from the leftmost column (the alkali metals) to the rightmost column (the noble gases).[19] Previously, they were known by roman numerals. In America, the roman numerals were followed by either an "A" if the group was in the s- or p-block, or a "B" if the group was in the d-block. The roman numerals used correspond to the last digit of today's naming convention (e.g. the group 4 elements were group IVB, and the group 14 elements were group IVA). In Europe, the lettering was similar, except that "A" was used if the group was before group 10, and "B" was used for groups including and after group 10. In addition, groups 8, 9 and 10 used to be treated as one triple-sized group, known collectively in both notations as group VIII. In 1988, the new IUPAC naming system was put into use, and the old group names were deprecated.[20]

Some of these groups have been given trivial (unsystematic) names, as seen in the table below, although some are rarely used. Groups 3–10 have no trivial names and are referred to simply by their group numbers or by the name of the first member of their group (such as "the scandium group" for group 3),[19] since they display fewer similarities and/or vertical trends.

Group :

Elements in the same group tend to show patterns in atomic radius, ionization energy, and electronegativity. From top to bottom in a group, the atomic radii of the elements increase. Since there are more filled energy levels, valence electrons are found farther from the nucleus. From the top, each successive element has a lower ionization energy because it is easier to remove an electron since the atoms are less tightly bound. Similarly, a group has a top-to-bottom decrease in electronegativity due to an increasing distance between valence electrons and the nucleus.[21] There are exceptions to these trends: for example, in group 11, electronegativity increases farther down the group.[22]
Periods
Main article: Period (periodic table)
A period is a horizontal row in the periodic table. Although groups generally have more significant periodic trends, there are regions where horizontal trends are more significant than vertical group trends, such as the f-block, where the lanthanides and actinides form two substantial horizontal series of elements.[24]

Elements in the same period show trends in atomic radius, ionization energy, electron affinity, and electronegativity. Moving left to right across a period, atomic radius usually decreases. This occurs because each successive element has an added proton and electron, which causes the electron to be drawn closer to the nucleus.[25] This decrease in atomic radius also causes the ionization energy to increase when moving from left to right across a period. The more tightly bound an element is, the more energy is required to remove an electron. Electronegativity increases in the same manner as ionization energy because of the pull exerted on the electrons by the nucleus.[21] Electron affinity also shows a slight trend across a period. Metals (left side of a period) generally have a lower electron affinity than nonmetals (right side of a period), with the exception of the noble gases.[26]

Categories
Metal and nonmetals can be further classified into subcategories that show a gradation from metallic to non-metallic properties, when going left to right across the periodic table. The metals may be subdivided into the highly reactive alkali metals, through the less reactive alkaline earth metals, lanthanides and actinides, via the archetypal transition metals, and ending in the physically and chemically weak metals bordering the metalloids. Nonmetals may be subdivided into those in the vicinity of the metalloids, with the nearest of these, carbon, phosphorus, and selenium, showing incipient metallic character; the very reactive halogens; and the almost inert, monatomic noble gases.

Different authors may use different categories, depending on the properties of interest, such as refractory metals and noble metals,[27] and these are occasionally shown as such.[28] Depending on the author, the composition of a specific category may differ, particularly around the boundaries where properties tend to be intermediate. For example, the boundaries of the metalloid category often vary significantly: most authors include the six shown as metalloids above, but a sizeable minority also includes some of selenium, polonium, and astatine, and references to other elements as metalloids are occasionally found.

Other classification schemes are possible such as the division of the elements into mineralogical occurrence categories, or crystalline structures. Categorizing the elements in this fashion dates back to at least 1869 when Hinrichs[29] wrote that simple boundary lines could be placed on the periodic table to show elements having shared properties, such as metals, nonmetals, or gaseous elements.

Shared properties can usually be explained by the position of the applicable elements in the periodic table. For example, the noble gases are in the rightmost column, meaning they have complete electron shells and are reluctant to participate in chemical reactions. And the very reactive halogens, which are located just to the left of noble gases, lack one electron needed to attain a noble gas configuration and are thus are very likely to attract one. As metallicity tends to increase going down and to the left of the periodic table, the metalloids (roughly intermediate between metals and nonmetals) occupy approximately a diagonal band.

Relativistic effects may complicate some categorisation. For example, the halogens are widely regarded as nonmetals. Yet the fifth and sixth halogens, astatine and tennessine, are predicted to be metals due to relativistic effects. The noble gases include oganesson, which is expected to be a metallic looking, reactive solid.[30] Thus there is some question as to whether categories such as "noble gas" should be formal categorisations containing the whole group, or if they should also demand similar chemical behaviour.[31]

Blocks
Main article: Block (periodic table)

Left to right: s-, f-, d-, p-block in the periodic table
Specific regions of the periodic table can be referred to as blocks in recognition of the sequence in which the electron shells of the elements are filled. Elements are assigned to blocks by what orbitals their valence electrons or vacancies lie in.[32] The s-block comprises the first two groups (alkali metals and alkaline earth metals) as well as hydrogen and helium. The p-block comprises the last six groups, which are groups 13 to 18 in IUPAC group numbering (3A to 8A in American group numbering) and contains, among other elements, all of the metalloids. The d-block comprises groups 3 to 12 (or 3B to 2B in American group numbering) and contains all of the transition metals. The f-block, often offset below the rest of the periodic table, has no group numbers and comprises most of the lanthanides and actinides. A hypothetical g-block is expected to begin around element 121, a few elements away from what is currently known.[33]